add subdaily granularity (#5882)
fishtown-analytics/docs.getdbt.com: website/docs/docs/build/metricflow-time-spine.md

tags: [Metrics, Semantic Layer]
---

> It's common for analytics engineers to have a date dimension or "time spine" table as a base table for different types of time-based joins and aggregations. The structure of this table is typically a base column of daily or hourly dates, with additional columns for other time grains, like fiscal quarter, defined based on the base column. You can join other tables to the time spine on the base column to calculate metrics like revenue at a point in time, or to aggregate to a specific time grain.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It's common in analytics engineering to have a date dimension or "time spine" table as a base table for different types of time-based joins and aggregations. The structure of this table is typically a base column of daily or hourly dates, with additional columns for other time grains, like fiscal quarter, defined based on the base column. You can join other tables to the time spine on the base column to calculate metrics like revenue at a point in time, or to aggregate to a specific time grain.
```

> MetricFlow requires you to define a time spine table as a project level configuration, which then is used for various time-based joins and aggregations, like cumulative metrics. 

Reviewer 2: Can we add that the time spine needs to have `day` grain at minimum?

Reviewer 3: Added

> If you already have a date dimension or time spine table in your dbt project you can simply point MetricFlow at this table. To do this, update the `model` configuration to use this table in the semantic layer. For example, given the following directory structure, you can create two time spine configurations, `time_spine_hourly` and `time_spine_daily`.

Reviewer 2: Do you think people migrating from the old time spine will think they need to rename the model? Not sure if we want to add a note about that (that you can keep the old name) to avoid confusion!

Reviewer 3: Added an note about this.

> If you already have a date dimension or time spine table in your dbt project you can simply point MetricFlow at this table. To do this, you need to update the `model` configuration to use this table in the semantic layer. For example, given the following directory structure I can create two time spine configurations, `time_spine_hourly` and `time_spine_daily`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you already have a date dimension or time spine table in your dbt project you can simply point MetricFlow at this table. To do this, update the `model` configuration to use this table in the semantic layer. For example, given the following directory structure, you can create two time spine configurations, `time_spine_hourly` and `time_spine_daily`.
```

![Time spine directory structure](/img/docs/building-metrics/time_spines.png)

```yaml
models:
  - name: time_spine_hourly
    time_spine:
      standard_granularity_column: date_hour # column for the standard grain of your table
    columns:
      - name: date_hour
        granularity: hour # set granularity at column-level for standard_granularity_column
  - name: time_spine_daily
    time_spine:
      standard_granularity_column: date_day # column for the standard grain of your table
    columns:
      - name: date_day
        granularity: day # set granularity at column-level for standard_granularity_column
```

> Let's break down the configuration above. We're pointing to a model called `time_spine_daily`. We set the time spine configurations under the `time_spine` key. The `standard_granularity_column` is the lowest grain of the table, in this case hourly. It needs to reference a column defined under the columns key, in this case `date_hour`. We will use the `standard_granularity_column` as the join key for the time spine table when joining tables in MetricFlow. The granularity of the `standard_granularity_column` is set at the column level, in this case `hour`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, break down the configuration above. It's pointing to a model called `time_spine_daily`. It sets the time spine configurations under the `time_spine` key. The `standard_granularity_column` is the lowest grain of the table, in this case, it's hourly. It needs to reference a column defined under the columns key, in this case, `date_hour`. Use the `standard_granularity_column` as the join key for the time spine table when joining tables in MetricFlow. Here, the granularity of the `standard_granularity_column` is set at the column level, in this case, `hour`.
```

> If you need to create a time spine table from scratch, you can do so by adding the following code to your dbt project. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you need to create a time spine table from scratch, add the following code to your dbt project. 
```

> The example creates a time spine at a daily grain and an hourly grain. We recommend creating both an hourly and daily time spine, MetricFlow will use the appropriate time spine based on the granularity of the metric selected to minimize data scans.

Reviewer 2: Can we add some more detail here? Some things I think it would be helpful to know:
- MetricFlow will use the time spine with the largest compatible granularity for a given query to ensure the most efficient query possible
- You can add a time spine for each granularity you intend to use if minor query efficiency is more important to you than setup time / space constraints
- We recommend having a time spine at the finest grain used in any of your dimensions to avoid unexpected errors

Reviewer 3: Added more context

tags: [Metrics, Semantic Layer]
---

> MetricFlow uses a timespine table to construct cumulative metrics. By default, MetricFlow expects the timespine table to be named `metricflow_time_spine` and doesn't support using a different name.

Reviewer 2: @mirnawong1 For this entire file - can we use this deleted text for versions <=1.8, instead of the new text? The new text should only be for 1.9+.

MetricFlow requires you to define a time spine table as a project level configuration, which then is used for various time-based joins and aggregations, like cumulative metrics. At a minimum, you need to define a time spine table for a daily grain. You can optionally define a time spine table for a different granularity, like hourly.

> If you already have a date dimension or time spine table in your dbt project you can simply point MetricFlow at this table. To do this, update the `model` configuration to use this table in the semantic layer. For example, given the following directory structure, you can create two time spine configurations, `time_spine_hourly` and `time_spine_daily`. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you already have a date dimension or time spine table in your dbt project, you can point MetricFlow to this table by updating the `model` configuration to use this table in the Semantic Layer. For example, given the following directory structure, you can create two time spine configurations, `time_spine_hourly` and `time_spine_daily`. 
```

::tip 

> Previously, we required you to create a model called `metricflow_time_spine` in your dbt project. This is no longer required, however you can build your time spine model from this table if you don't have another date dimension table you want to use in your project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Previously, you were required to create a model called `metricflow_time_spine` in your dbt project. This is no longer required. However, you can build your time spine model from this table if you don't have another date dimension table you want to use in your project.
```

> ::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:::
```

> ![Time spine directory structure](/img/docs/building-metrics/time_spines.png)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<Lightbox src="/img/docs/building-metrics/time_spines.png" title="Time spine directory structure" />
```

> <Lightbox src="/img/docs/building-metrics/time_spines.png" title="Time spine directory structure" />

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<Lightbox src="/img/time_spines.png" title="Time spine directory structure" />
```

select *
from final
-- filter the time spine to a specific range
where date_day > dateadd(year, -4, current_timestamp()) 
and date_hour < dateadd(day, 30, current_timestamp())
```

</VersionBlock>

> You only need to include the `date_day` column in the table. MetricFlow can handle broader levels of detail, but it doesn't currently support finer grains.

Reviewer 2: @mirnawong1 for old versions, we can update this to say: 
"...but finer grains are only supported in versions 1.9+."
